# Welcome to SpecpolFlow!

## About SpecpolFlow

`SpecpolFlow` is a software package that provides a completely pythonic workflow for the analysis of spectropolarimetric observations of astronomical sources (for example, data acquired using instruments such as ESPaDOnS at CFHT, Narval at TBL, etc). It is designed to provide a single, user-friendly pipeline from telescope to science product.

`SpecpolFlow`'s routines handle two computationally challenging tasks in spectropolarimetry: spectral normalization (normPlot) and least-squares deconvolution (LSD) profile calculation (LSDpy). The `SpecpolFlow` package also provides several supporting tools for developing and cleaning line masks, calculating the longitudinal magnetic field, and visualizing the LSD profile. These tools can be used through a fully documented Python API or through a command line interface.

The `SpecpolFlow` team also maintains a series of detailed tutorials with examples of how to construct a flexible workflow for your specific needs (e.g., automation for very large datasets using tools like `pandas`, the Python Data Analysis Library). These tutorials are in the form of Python notebooks, which can also be run using collaborative platforms such as Google Colab. 

## Version Release Notes

NEW: SpecpolFlow v1.1 release 2026 March 1
* New functions
    * Equivalent widths and V/R ratios can now be calculated using the [`calc_ew`](Spectrum.calc_ew) function from the [`Spectrum`](Spectrum) class or the [`calc_ew`](LSD.calc_ew) from the [`LSD`](LSD) class. Use cases are demonstrated in the subject [Measuring equivalent widths](Tutorials/12-EquivalentWidth_Tutorial.ipynb) tutorial.
    * V/R ratios (ratio of the equivalent width of the violet side of a line to the red side of a line) can now be calculated using the [`calc_V_R`](LSD.calc_V_R) functions from the [`LSD`](LSD) class.
    * Plotting spectra and line lists with the `plot_obs_lines` function, which can label lines from the list, and plot Stokes I, V, null, or both I and V spectra
    * Plotting line lists and labels with flexible formatting with the `plot_lineList` function
    * Command line plotting tool for spectra and line lists `spf-plotspec`, as an easy 'quick look' tool
    * Plotting a breakdown of the number of lines from different elements in a Mask with the new `????` function
    * Tools for converting between wavelengths in air and vacuum for the Spectrum, LineList, and Mask classes, with their `vacuum_to_air` and `air_to_vacuum` functions
    * Tools for Doppler shifting the Spectrum, LineList, and Mask classes, with their `doppler_shift` functions
    * Function to convert Mask objects back into LineList objects `Mask.convert_to_line_list` (complimenting the `make_mask` and `convert_list_to_mask` functions)
    * (added a general purpose `_moment` function  ...  But maybe we don't mention it here since it isn't tutorialized, more for internal use)
* Modified functions
    * `Spectrum.coadd` can now coadd spectral orders separately, or it can merge spectral orders before coadding.  By default it will coadd orders individually, which is controlled by the `byOrders` keyword.  If orders are merged before coadding, how the merge is done is controlled by the `mergeOrders` keyword.
    * `converters.espadons` and `converters.spirou` functions can now read compressed fits files in fits.gz, fits.zip, or fits.b2z formats
    * `read_spectrum` has a new `usecols` option to control which columns of the input text file are used, for non-standard formats
    * `LSD.calc_bz` has a new `plotAllCOG` option, which can be set to `False` to only plot the center of gravity used, not all alternatives
    * The plot generated by LSDpy has removed the smoothed profile included by default (the full unsmoothed profile is still plotted the same)
* New tutorials
    * [Measuring equivalent widths](Tutorials/12-EquivalentWidth_Tutorial.ipynb)
    * [Plotting Spectra with Line Lists](Tutorials/PlotLinesSpectra_Tutorial.ipynb)

SpecpolFlow v1.0 was released in 2025 July.


## Contact us!
You can reach the SpF Development Team with questions or comments at: specpolflow@gmail.com

## Using `SpecpolFlow` in publications
If you use the `SpecpolFlow` package in the preparation of any publications, please use the following acknowledgment:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The `SpecpolFlow` package is available at https://github.com/folsomcp/specpolFlow.

Individual components of `SpecpolFlow` can be referenced as follows:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;LSDpy: The GitHub repository for LSDpy is available at https://github.com/folsomcp/LSDpy.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;normPlot: The GitHub repository for normPlot is available at https://github.com/folsomcp/normPlot.  

